# HyDroForM integration with OSCAR

## Table of contents

## Introduction

As I am adding the rest of the components for OSCAR integration I decided to create a general wiki page for the integration

## Overview of components

Brief overview of each step in the HyDroForM workflow

### HydroMT

HydroMT is used to generate model input files from user configuration. The input is a configuration file where the user specifies the model parameters, as well as a data catalog which is used to retrieve the data needed to build the model files.

#### HydroMT input data

`wflow.ini` is the configuration file that the user provides to HydroMT. This file contains the model parameters and the paths to the data catalog.
`catalog.yaml` is the data catalog that HydroMT uses to retrieve the data needed to build the model files.

#### Scripts

`config_gen.py` is a script that generates the `wflow.ini` file from the user input.
`build.sh` is a script that runs HydroMT to generate the model input files.
`stac.py` is a script that generates a STAC collection from the model output files.

#### HydroMT output data

HydroMT step outputs a stac collection containing two netcdf items `staticmaps.nc` and `forcings.nc`.

#### Running the HydroMT step

The container is available on Docker Hub:

```bash
potato55/hydromt-demo:latest
```

By default it starts in the `/hydromt` directory. Everything happens here so there is no need to `cd` anywhere.

We use several steps and scripts to run the HydroMT part of our workflow.

First we need to generate a config file for HydroMT based on user input. This is done using the `config_gen.py` script.

Currently we only expose two parameters for testing. This step can be run using the following command:

**All paths are predefined so you do not need to touch or change anything.**

**All scripts are available in the container as well, I don't know if you can call those directly in OSCAR or not.**

```bash
python /usr/bin/config_gen.py 0.008999999999 cerra_land_stac
```

Where:

- `0.008999999999` is the model resolution
- `cerra_land_stac` is a dataset name (we have multiple options)

In the future we will expose more parameters but for testing this is enough.

This will generate a `wflow.ini` configuration file used in `HydroMT`.

Now we can run the HydroMT workflow like this:

```bash
hydromt build wflow model -r "{'subbasin': [11.4750, 46.8720]}" -d data_catalog.yaml -i wflow.ini -vvv
```

*Note*: If you need to run an external script to call this in OSCAR, I included a `build.sh` script that can be used to run the above command. You can call this script from OSCAR.

```bash
./build.sh
```

Where:

- `-r` is the region of interest
- `-d` is the catalog file, which contains links to the STAC data
- `-i` is the config file we just generated

HydroMT generates a `model` directory containing some output files which we need for the next steps. For OpenEO integration we need this wrapped as STAC collections. This is done using the `/usr/bin/stac.py` script in the container.

```bash
python /usr/bin/stac.py --staticmaps_path "./model/staticmaps.nc" --forcings_path "./model/forcings.nc" --output_dir "./model/stac"
```

Where:

- `--staticmaps_path` is the path to the staticmaps file
- `--forcings_path` is the path to the forcings file
- `--output_dir` is the directory where the STAC collections will be saved

It uses the `Raster2Stac` component to wrap the results and also push to and S3 bucket. I have disabled this so we do not hav to shuffle credentials around. What it will do is generate the output locally.

The output files will looks something like this:

```bash
20010101000000_20010331000000/
20200101000000_20201201000000/
cbc5681b-11e0-4343-bdf2-07351176e81e_WFLOW_FORCINGS_STATICMAPS.json
inline_items.csv
items/
```

That is all. These files can then be used in our later steps.

### Wflow

The second step of the workflow is to run the Wflow model using the input files generated by HydroMT.

#### Wflow input data

`wflow_sbm.toml` A configuration file for the Wflow model.
`forcings.nc` The forcing data for the Wflow model.
`staticmaps.nc` The staticmaps data for the Wflow model.

#### Wflow scripts

`run_wflow.sh` A script that runs the Wflow model.
`to_zarr.py` A script that converts the Wflow model output to zarr.

#### Wflow Output data

`output.zarr` While we have several outputs, we convert these to zarr.

#### Running the Wflow model

TODO: Add instructions on how to run the Wflow model

### Surrogate training

The final step of our workflow is the surrogate training which utilizes `itwinai`.

#### Surrogate input data

`config.yaml` an `itwinai` configuration file, containing link to the .zarr data generated by Wflow, as well as the model parameters.

#### Surrogate scripts

`run_surrogate.sh` A script that runs the surrogate training.

#### Surrogate output data

Outputs data to `MLFlow`

#### Running the surrogate training

TODO: Add instructions on how to run the surrogate training

## OSCAR integration

This section contains the work done on the OSCAR side to integrate the HyDroForM workflow.

### OSCAR HydroMT

TODO: Add description of the OSCAR HydroMT integration
